---
date: 2024-02-06
---


## Motivation

I've started working with Fable on some projects, it'd be nice to use FsSpec on them.

But, fable requires special packaging and might not work with some of the .NET features I rely on.


## Exploration

Q: How do I package for fable?
- A: https://fable.io/docs/your-fable-project/author-a-fable-library.html

Q: What fable-unsupported features might I rely on?
- SpecData
  - `IComparable<T>` is uncertain, everything else looks ok
- Default Validators
  - a few type tests :? String and :? IEnumerable
- SpecModule
  - `isLeafValidForType` uses `isAssignableFrom`, but this method is only used by the FsCheck data generation, so I could easily move it out
- Normalization: everything looks ok
- Formatters: looks ok
- Summary: the biggest risks for the core library are IComparable and the type tests
  - The type tests are pretty simple and should be types I can differentiate in javascript. If necessary, I might be able to break out a test that compiles differently based on Fable / non-fable


What now?
- the easiest thing to test would be IComparable

Q: Does Fable support IComparable?
- it's not listed in [.NET compatability](https://fable.io/docs/javascript/compatibility.html)
- a quick repo search shows that the various languages seems to all have implementations for IComparable https://github.com/search?q=repo%3Afable-compiler%2FFable%20Icomparable&type=code
- A quick [fable interactive](https://fable.io/repl/) test fails to compile `System.Int32.CompareTo is not supported by Fable`
  - ```fsharp
        type Boi (n:int) =
        member _.n = n
        interface IComparable<Boi> with
            member this.CompareTo(other: Boi) : int = 
                this.n.CompareTo(other.n)

        console.log([|Boi(2); Boi(99); Boi(1)|] |> Array.sortBy (fun b -> b.n))```
  - It works fine if I write my own compareTo implementation
  - ```fsharp
        type Boi (n:int) =
            member _.n = n
            interface IComparable<Boi> with
                member this.CompareTo(other: Boi) : int = 
                    if this.n = other.n then 0
                    else if (this.n > other.n) then 1
                    else -1 ```
- A: Looks like I can't count on being able to call CompareTo on native types...
  - This pretty much undermines trying to support fable. 
- Q: What about non-generic IComparable. I feel like I saw that used in numerous posts?
  - actually, types are erased. If I need different validators for JS anyway, then I might be able to rely on dynamic interop features on comparison and still get the compile-time validation without actually using the CompareTo function
  - I'm not sure how they manage it for list sorts and such...


Q: How do I set up a test project for fable?
- Fable.Mocha seems to be the standard and it's largely expecto compatible. Though I don't think that includes property testing

I suppose the first step is just to see how many tests I can get passing. Eventually I'd like to get down to using a single test suite if possible 

options for type testing https://github.com/fable-compiler/Fable/issues/1981

PROBLEM: almost all my tests are property tests, and there's no testProperty shadowing method

Q: What would it take to support property tests in JS?
- There is a binding for a property testing library [Fable.FastCheck](https://fable.io/packages/#/package/Fable.FastCheck)
  - FastCheck is, understandably, not reflection-based https://github.com/dubzzz/fast-check
- REQ: I'd need to find a way to turn type information into fastcheck data generator specifications
- REQ: I'd need to translate my custom generators to fast check
- This seems pretty intensive. I don't think I can achieve a shared test suite in the the kind of time I'd want to invest.
- FsCheck is also far too reflection-based to plausibly port to fable.
  - ! Fable.SimpleJson implements an interesting reflection system that might actually be usable for a basic FsCheck-compatible wrapper over FastCheck
    - https://github.com/Zaid-Ajaj/Fable.SimpleJson/blob/0739c372c01834c3ec482100331c56184809b167/src/TypeInfo.Converter.fs#L196

Q: Could expecto be ported to fable?
- It wouldn't help me anyway, since it's shadowing `testProperty` that I need most, and that won't port
  - Just for curiosity...
- I think the test defining functions, structures, and the assertions would all port just fine, but we'd need to split the runner code from core. The runner depends on some .NET libraries for parsing, printing, locking for progress tracking (in `Progress.fs`)

Type tests might actually be possible because [some reflection is supported](https://fable.io/docs/javascript/compatibility.html#reflection-and-generics) including 
- A: it is possible, there is [an example of type testing in the reflection tests](https://github.com/fable-compiler/Fable/blob/98bf8288b154cbae4ebfc29db79ad9ac163906e1/tests/Js/Main/ReflectionTests.fs#L619)

Weirdly, the test suite and IComparable might be the biggest risks to Fable compatibility, though I bet the IComparable situation could be worked around with compiler directives.
The test suite is just me not wanting to re-write the almost 100% property test-based test suite.

NEXT: Maybe I try setting it up as a fable package and try using it in some simple cases without setting up the test suite.
If it works well enough, then I can worry about the test suite problem.

